# Changelog
All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [v1.3.0]
### Changed
 - Haploid variant calling reverted to old-style methodology.
### Fixed
 - Early exits on error in `medaka_consensus` and `medaka_variant`.
 - `INFO` field of VCFs is now correctly `.` when empty.
 

## [v1.2.6]
### Changed
 - Rewrote inference data loading code for clarity.
 - Removed pinned BioPython pin.
 - Formally update htslib program requirements to 1.11.
### Removed
 - Support for Python 3.5.
### Fixed
 - Corner case in consensus stitching.


## [v1.2.5]
### Fixed
 - Variant annotation when more than one CHROM record in VCF.


## [v1.2.4]
### Fixed
 - Variant annotation when counts matrix does not span variants.
### Changed
 - Updated Tensorflow requirement to 2.2.2


## [v1.2.3]
### Fixed
 - Off-by-one error during stitching of consensus chunks.


## [v1.2.2]

Minor release

### Fixed
 - Fixed incorrect read depth annotations in VCFs.
 - Fixed missing files in PyPI source distribution.
 - Fix `StopIteration` issues in newer Pythons.
### Added
 - Added `-n` option to `medaka_variant` to add a sample field to outputs.
 - Set `HDF5_USE_FILE_LOCKING=FALSE`, which some users report as useful.
 - Set `OMP_NUM_THREADS=1` required to make Tensorflow anaconda use CPU resource sensibly.


## [v1.2.1]

Minor release

### Fixed
 - Fix issue whereby variant ALTs were created equal to REF.
### Added
 - Build a medaka-cpu package depending on tensorflow-cpu.


## [v1.2.0]

Performance release

### Fixed
 - Fix long-standing issue where genome regions could be unprocessed.
### Added
 - Improve inference performance by 30%.
 - Add efficient multiprocessing to `medaka stitch`.


## [v1.1.3]

Bug fix and feature release

### Fixed
 - Fix iteration error in retrieving trimmed reads.
 - Work around tensorflow threading issue.
### Added
 - Add ability to `haploid2diploid` tool on VCFs generated by `medaka_haploid_variant`


## [v1.1.2]

Bug fix and feature release

### Fixed
### Added
 - Fix issues in command-line argument parsing.
 - Add true ploidy-1 variant caller.
 - Do not break contigs at unpolished regions (fill with input instead).
 - Add multi-nucleotide variant decomposition to be compatible with DeepVariant.


## [v1.1.1]

Bux fix release.

### Fixed
 - Remove python version check preventing Python >3.6 builds from running.


## [v1.1.0]

Update with new models and features.

### Fixed
 - Fix a few bugs in variant annotation program.
### Added
 - Add ARM builds to PyPI release.
 - Add Python 3.7 and 3.8 builds for x86-64.
 - Add PromethION model for Guppy 4.0.11.
### Changed
 - Upgrade to Tensorflow 2.2.
 - Option to split MNPs to independent SNPs (for compatibility with DeepVariant).
 - Single molecule consensus program now uses `pyspoa`.
### Removed
 - Remove methylation aggregation functionality.


## [v1.0.3]

Minor fixes release.

### Fixed
 - Fix occasional mangled sam output in guppy2sam.
### Changed
 - Update htslib ecosystem to 1.10 to fix conda installation issue.

## [v1.0.2]

Minor fixes and models release.

### Fixed
 - VCF GQ is now an integer in line with VCF spec.
 - Fixed issue requiring a previous model for training.
 - Fixed issue causing -p option of medaka_variant to crash.
 - Fixed issue preventing installation in a virtualenv with python <3.6.
### Added
 - R9.4.1 variant calling models for Guppy 3.6.0 and updated benchmarks.
 - Made r941_min_high_g360 the default consensus model. 


## [v1.0.1]

Minor fixes release, resolving issues introduced in v1.0.0.

### Fixed
 - Fix default model for SNP calling. 
 - Fix issue causing medaka_consensus to crash. 


## [v1.0.0]

Models, features and fixes release

### Fixed
 - Fix to methylation aggregation.
### Added
 - Consensus models for Guppy 3.6.0.
 - Add functionality for auto-download of older models.
 - VCF annotation tool.


## [v0.12.1]

Minor release.

### Changed
 - Harmonised versions of htslib/samtools dependencies.


## [v0.12.0]

Models, features and fixes release

### Fixed
 - Minor speed improvement.
 - Fix bug where force overwrite of output was always enabled.
 - Fix bug where variant calling of a region crashed if the region began with a deletion.
### Added
 - Variant calling models for R10.3 and R9.4.1 and updated benchmarks.
 - Consensus models for Guppy 3.5.1.
 - Add read group (RG) tag filtering.
 - Add option to create consensus sequence via intermediate .vcf file.
 - Update to methylation calling documentation.
 - Addition of all-context modified-base aggregation.


## [v0.11.5]

R10.3 model and small fixes

### Fixed
 - Fix index/compression issue with RLE workflow
 - Fix a rare memory error during feature generation caused by very long indels.
### Added
 - Add model for R10.3 on MinION.
 - Write and empty vcf when no variants are found in medaka_variant.


## [v0.11.4]

Bugfix release

### Fixed
 - Fix invalid specification of variant calling model.


## [v0.11.3]

Model release

### Added
 - Models for guppy 3.4.4. 


## [v0.11.2]

Minor fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix a memory error in pileup calculation.
### Added
 - Update variant calling models and benchmarks.


## [v0.11.1]

Minor fix release

### Fixed
 - Detect NaNs during training and halt early.
 - Workaround pysam interface changes (for conda package).
### Added
 - Preliminary hard-RLE model for R9.4.1
 - --regions argument can now be a .bed file.
 - Support soft-RLE network training.

This release includes an experimental consensus mode using run-length encoded
alignments. Use of this algorithm can be specified using the new "rle" model:

    medaka_consensus -m r941_min_high_g340_rle -i basecalls.fasta -d draft.fa

## [v0.11.0]

Feature release

### Added
 - Consensus models for guppy 3.3 and 3.4.
 - Aggregation of Guppy modified base probability tables.
 - Multi-thread stitching of inference chunks in `medaka_consensus`.
 - Optionally run whatshap phase at the end of `medaka_variant`.


## [v0.10.1]

Minor fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix bug where feature matrix was misaligned with coordinate system.
 - Fixed issue with `medaka_variant` failing on zero-coverage regions.
 - Rename incorrectly named diploid SNP calling model.
 - Made variant calling faster by resolving trivial bottleneck in variant classification.
### Added
 - Add missing arguments from `smolecule` command.
 - Output contig names are no longer written as samtools-style regions.


## [v0.10.0]

Feature release

### Fixed
 - Corrected parsing of region strings with multiple `:` charaters
 - Fixed bug causing larger than requested overlap in inference chunks.
 - Fixed rare consensus stitching error.
### Added
 - Added a `-f` force overwrite option to `medaka_consenses`.
 - Added *C. elegans* assembly benchmarks to documentation.
### Changed
 - Switched variant calling to an explicitely diploid calling model.
 - Refreshed *E. coli* benchmark to include effect of `racon`.
 - Refreshed variant calling benchmarks.


## [v0.9.2]

Minor fix release.

### Fixed
 - Additional fix to handling lowercase reference sequences.
 - Fix bug in creation of RLE alignments.
### Added
 - Update `update_model.py` script.
### Changed
 - Unify how LabelSchemes store training data.
### Removed
 - Remove option to select labelling scheme during training.


## [v0.9.1]

Minor fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix regression in medaka stitch and medaka snp speed.
 - Remove dill and yaml requirements.
### Added
 - Handle lowercase letters in reference sequences.


## [v0.9.0]

Bugfix and training refactor release

### Fixed
 - Fix readlink issue on MacOS
 - Fix bug where medaka_variant did not call indels by default
 - Fix bug in determining when to split contigs
 - Make network feature generation 2x faster
### Added
 - Add smolecule command
 - Log use of GPU and cuDNN, noting workaround for RTX cards
### Changed
 - Store models in git-lfs
 - Simplify medaka_variant workflow for speed
 - Refactor labelling of training data and storing of models
 - Reimplement RLE feature generation
### Removed
 - Drop support for older basecaller models (guppy<3.0.3)


## [v0.8.2]

Documentation release

### Added
 - Clarify suggested workflows in documentation.


## [v0.8.1]

Patch release

### Fixed
 - Patch import of loading of older models


## [v0.8.0]

Model release and development release

### Added
 - Add support for R10 basecaller
 - Add diploid multi-labelling
### Changed
 - Upgrade to tensorflow 1.14.0


## [v0.7.1]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix regression in consensus stitching when chunks do not overlap.


## [v0.7.0]

Feature release

### Added
 - Indel calling for `medaka_variant`.
 - New models for MinION/GridION and PromethION paired to high accuracy an fast
  guppy basecallers.
### Changed
 - Overhaul of chunk handling and overlapping.


## [v0.6.5]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix Makefile for parallel build.
 - Ensure medaka consensus is given absolute path to model.
### Added
 - Tidy up some parsing and sorting of regions from strings.
### Changed
 - Disable by default validation of output HDF during consensus.
 - Refactor variant handling code.


## [v0.6.4]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix for models not specifiying data types.


## [v0.6.3]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Split pileup when reads do not span rather than silently deleting region.
 - Fix error in stitching occuring with a single region.
### Changed
 - Refactor handling of short and remainder regions.
### Removed
 - Drop 3.4 support.


## [v0.6.2]

Bug fix release

### Added
 - Enhanced verification of training feature samples
### Changed
 - Pin pyyaml version

## [v0.6.1]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Fixed bug in `medaka_consensus` incorrectly calling python


## [v0.6.0]

SNP calling, model, and bugfix release release

### Fixed
 - Workaround short-contig/no-coverage corner case during pileup.
### Added
 - Prototype SNP calling and phasing, [benchmarks](https://nanoporetech.github.io/medaka/snp.html)
 - Add model for improved Flip-flop model in Guppy 2.3.5
### Changed
 - Rename models to be more logical
 - Update to htslib version 1.9 for long cigars


## [v0.5.2]

Bug fix release

### Fixed
 - Fix bug leading to dropping of pileup chunks during loading


## [v0.5.1]

Development and performance release

### Changed
 - Refactor batch queuing in preparation to using keras Sequence
 - Asynchrounous feature loading during inference
 - Pin version of h5py to work around intermittent errors in saving models


## [v0.5.0]

Training and bug-fix release.

### Fixed
 - Resolve issue with contained chunks during stitching
 - Resolve hanging at the end of training
### Added
 - Improved storage and retrieval of features for better IO
 - Training speed improved >10X
### Changed
 - Switch to CuDNN for GRU layers
 - Check presence of `minimap2` and `samtools`
 - Provide more feedback on error


## [v0.4.3]

Model release.

### Added
 - Add support for R9.4.1 flip-flop basecaller


## [v0.4.1]

Development release.

### Added
 - Adds build infrastructure for source distributions and manylinux wheels.


## [v0.4.0]

Performance and bugfix release.

### Added
 - Large refactoring of feature and sample generation. Fixes many small bugs
  and edge cases
 - Resize models for small contigs
 - Faster Generation of inference features
 - Model updates
 - Ability to handle multiple read types
### Changed
 - Remove redundant samtools tview code
 - Limit CPU usage when running without a GPU


## [v0.3.0]

Model and userbility release.

### Fixed
 - Many small bug fixes
### Added
 - New non-RLE model
 - Updated documentation and benchmarks
 - Dockerfile to build a medaka Docker image
### Changed
 - `medaka_consensus` no longer needs a pomoxis installation to run
